SoupBinTCP 
Version 4.00 
 
1. Overview   
SoupBinTCP 4.00 is a lightweight point-to-point protocol, built on top of TCP/IP 
sockets that allow delivery of a set of sequenced and unsequenced messages from a 
server to a client in real-time. SoupBinTCP guarantees that the client receives each 
sequenced message generated by the server in the correct order, even across 
underlying TCP/IP socket connection failures.  SoupBinTCP 4.00 delivers 
unsequenced messages on a best-effort basis only. 
SoupBinTCP clients can send messages to the server. These messages are not 
sequenced and may be lost in the case of a TCP/IP socket failure. 
 
SoupBinTCP 4.00 is ideal for systems where a server needs to guarantee delivery of 
certain messages to a client in real-time but does not require the same level of 
guarantees for any other messages.  The server may generate messages that are 
delivered only on a best-effort basis (unsequenced messages), and the client 
generated messages require no guarantees either because the data stream is 
unidirectional or because the server application generates higher-level            
acknowledgments for any important client-generated messages. 
 
SoupBinTCP is designed to be used in conjunction with higher lever protocols that 
specify the contents of the sequenced and unsequenced messages that SoupBinTCP 
delivers. The SoupBinTCP protocol layer is opaque to the higher-level messages, and 
permits any value within its messages. 
SoupBinTCP also includes a simple scheme that allows the server to authenticate the 
client on login. 
 
1.1 SoupBinTCP Logical Packets 
 
The SoupBinTCP client and server communicate by exchanging a series of logical 
packets. 
 
Each SoupBinTCP logical packet has: 
 
A. a two byte big-endian length that indicates the length of rest of the packet 
(meaning the length of the payload plus the length of the packet type – which is 1) 
 
B. a single byte header which indicates the packet type 
 
C. a variable length payload 
Two Byte Packet Packet Variable-length 
Length Type payload 
SoupBinTCP Logical Packet Structure  
 
 
Notes: 
 
The SoupBinTCP logical packets do not necessarily map directly to physical packets 
on the underlying network socket; they may be broken apart or aggregated by the 
TCP/IP stack. 
 
The SoupBinTCP protocol does not define a maximum payload length. 
 
Unlike the ASCII version, the payload may contain the line feed character or any 
character. 
 
1.2 Protocol Flow 
 
A SoupBinTCP connection begins with the client opening a TCP/IP socket to the 
server and sending a Login Request Packet. If the login request is valid, the server 
responds with a Login Accepted Packet and begins sending Sequenced and 
Unsequenced Data Packets. The connection continues until the TCP/IP socket is 
broken. 
 
Each Sequenced Data Packet carries a single higher-level protocol message. 
 
Sequenced Data Packets do not contain an explicit sequence number; instead both 
client and server compute the sequence number locally by counting messages as 
they go.  Note that clients must not count Unsequenced Data Packets from the 
server when calculating the sequence number. 
 
The sequence number of the first sequenced message in each session is always 1. 
 
Typically, when initially logging into a server the client will set the Requested 
Sequence Number field to 1 and leave the Requested Session field blank in the Login 
Request Packet. The client will then inspect the Login Accepted Packet to determine 
the currently active session. Starting at 1, the client begins incrementing its local 
sequence number each time a Sequenced Data Packet is received. If the TCP/IP 
connection is ever broken, the client can then re-log into the server indicating the 
current session and its next expected sequence number. By doing this, the client is 
guaranteed to always receive every sequenced message in order, despite TCP/IP 
connection failures. 
 
SoupBinTCP also permits the client to send messages to the server using 
Unsequenced Data Packets at any time after the Login Accepted Packet is received. 
These messages may be lost during TCP/IP socket connection failures. 
 
1.3 Heartbeats 
 
SoupBinTCP uses logical heartbeat packets to quickly detect link failures. The server 
must send a Server Heartbeat packet anytime more than 1 second has past since the 
server last sent any data. This ensures that the client will receive data on a regular 
basis. If the client does not receive anything (neither data nor heartbeats) for an 
extended period of time, it can assume that the link is down and attempt to 
reconnect using a new TCP/IP socket. 
 
Similarly, once logged in, the client must send a Client Heartbeat packet anytime 
more than 1 second has past since the client last sent anything. If the server doesn't 
receive anything from the client for an extended period of time (typically 15 
seconds), it can close the existing socket and listen for a new connection. 
 
1.4 End of Session Marker 
 
The server indicates that the current session has terminated by sending an End of 
Session Message. This indicates that there will be no more messages contained in 
this session.   
 
The client will have to reconnect and login with the new Session ID or a blank(space-
filled) Session ID to begin receiving messages for the next available session. 
 
1.5 Data Types 
 
Character data fields are standard ASCII bytes. 
 
Integer fields are binary big-endian values. 
  
2. SoupBinTCP Packet Types  
 
2.1 Debug Packet 
 
A debug packet can be sent by either side of a SoupBinTCP connection at anytime. 
Debug packets are intended to provide human readable text that may aid in 
debugging problems. Debug Packets should be ignored by both client and server 
application software. 
Debug Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value      Notes    
Packet Length 0 2 Integer  Number of bytes after this 
field until the next packet   

Packet Type  2 1   "+"   Debug Packet   
Text  3Variable Alpha-
numeric   Free form human readable 
text.   
 
 
2.2 Logical Packets Sent by a SoupBinTCP Server 
 
2.2.1 Login Accepted Packet 
 
The SoupBinTCP server sends a Login Accepted Packet in response to receiving a 
valid Login Request  from the client. This packet will always be the first non-debug 
packet sent by the server after a successful login request. 
Login Accepted Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value     Notes    
Packet Length 0 2 Integer  Number of bytes after this 
field until the next packet   
Packet Type  2 1 "A"   Login Accepted Packet   
Session  3 10 Alpha-
numeric  
 The session ID of the session 
that is now logged into. Left 
padded with spaces.  
 
Sequence 
Number  
13 20 Numeric   The sequence number in 
ASCII of the next Sequenced 
Message to be sent. Left 
padded with spaces.  
 
 
 
 
2.2.2 Login Rejected Packet 
 
The SoupBinTCP server sends this packet in response to an invalid Login Request 
Packet from the client. The server closes the socket connection after sending the 
Login Reject Packet. The Login Rejected Packet will be the only non-debug packet 
sent by the server in the case of an unsuccessful login attempt. 
Login Reject Packet  

 Name  Offset Len     Value    Notes     
Packet Length 0 2 Integer Number of bytes after this 
field until the next packet   
Packet Type  2 1   "J"  Login Rejected Packet   
Reject Reason 
Code  
31   Alpha  See Login Reject Codes 
below.  
 
 
 
Login Reject Codes  
 Code  Explanation  
"A"  Not Authorized. There was an  invalid username and password 
combination in the Login Request Message.  
"S"  
Session not available. The Requested Session in the Login 
Request Packet was either invalid or not available.   
 
 
2.2.3 Sequenced Data Packet 
 
The Sequenced Data Packets act as an envelope to carry the actual sequenced data 
messages that are transferred from the server to the client. Each Sequenced Data 
Packet carries one sequenced message from the higher-lever protocol. The sequence 
number of each message is implied; the initial sequence number of the first 
Sequenced Data Packet for a given TCP/IP connection is specified in the Login 
Accepted Packet and the sequence number increments by 1 for each Sequenced Data 
Packet transmitted. 
 
Since SoupBinTCP logical packets are carried via TCP/IP sockets, the only way logical 
packets can be lost is in the event of a TCP/IP socket connection failure. In this case, 
the client can reconnect to the server and request the next expect sequence number 
and pick up where it left off. 
Sequenced Data Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value     Notes    
Packet Length 0 2 Integer  Number of bytes after this 
field until the next packet   

Packet Type  2 1   "S"   Sequenced Data Packet   
Message  3Variable Any   Defined by a higher-level 
protocol  
 
 
 
2.2.4 Unsequenced Data Packet 
 
The Unsequenced Data Packets act as an envelope to carry the unsequenced data 
messages that are transferred from the server to the client. Each Unsequenced Data 
Packet carries one unsequenced message from the higher-lever protocol. These 
messages are unsequenced, and must not update the client’s initial sequence 
number for any subsequent Login attempt. 
Unsequenced Data Packets from the server are delivered on a best-effort basis only.  
They will be delivered at most once in the same order that they are generated by the 
higher level protocol.  However, some messages may be lost due to TCP/IP 
connection trouble including full buffers.  If message loss occurs, no portion of the 
lost message will be transmitted.  SoupBinTCP does not define the higher level 
protocol behavior when unsequenced messages are lost.  These semantics are 
defined by the higher level protocol. 
Unsequenced Data Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value     Notes    
Packet Length 0 2 Integer  Number of bytes after this 
field until the next packet   
Packet Type  2 1   "U"   Unsequenced Data Packet   
Message  3Variable Any   Defined by a higher-level 
protocol  
 
 
 
 
2.2.5 Server Heartbeat Packet 
 
The server should send a Server Heartbeat Packet anytime more than 1 second 
passes where no data has been sent to the client. The client can then assume that 
the link is lost if it does not receive anything for an extended period of time.  
Server Heartbeat Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value  Notes     
Packet Length 0 2 Integer Number of bytes after this field 
until the next packet   
Packet Type  2 1 "H"  Server Heartbeat Packet   
 
 
2.2.6 End of Session Packet 
 
The server will send an End of Session Packet to denote that the current session is 
finished. The connection will be closed shortly after this packet, and the user will no 
longer be able to reconnect to the current session. 
End of Session Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value  Notes     
Packet Length 0 2 Integer Number of bytes after this field 
until the next packet   
Packet Type  2 1 "Z"  End of Session Packet   
 
 
 
2.3 Logical Packets Sent by the SoupBinTCP Client 
 
2.3.1 Login Request Packet 
 
The SoupBinTCP client must send a Login Request Packet immediately upon 
establishing a new TCP/IP socket connection to the server. 
 
Client and server must have mutually agreed upon the username and password 
fields. They provide simple authentication to prevent a client from inadvertently 
connecting to the wrong server. 
 
Both Username and Password are case-insensitive and should be padded on the right 
with spaces. 
 
The server can terminate an incoming TCP/IP socket if it does not receive a Login 
Request Packet within a reasonable period of time (typically 30 seconds).  
Login Request Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value     Notes    
Packet Length 0 2 Integer 
 
Number of bytes after this 
field until the next packet  
Packet Type  2 1   "L"   Login Request Packet   
Username  3 6   Alphanumeric   Username   
Password  9 10   Alphanumeric   Password   
Requested   
Session  
19 10   Alphanumeric   Specifies the session the 
client would like to log into, 
or all blanks to log into the 
currently active session.  
 
Requested   
Sequence 
Number  
29 20
  Numeric   Specifies the next sequence 
number in ASCII the client 
wants to receive upon 
connection, or 0 to start 
receiving the most recently 
generated message.  
 
 
 
 
2.3.2 Unsequenced Data Packets 
 
The Unsequenced Data Packets act as an envelope to carry the actual data messages 
that are transferred from the client to the server. These messages are not sequenced 
and may be lost in the event of a socket failure. The higher-level protocol must be 
able to handle these lost messages in the case of a TCP/IP socket connection failure.  
Unsequenced Data Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value  Notes     
Packet Length 0 2 Integer Number of bytes after this field 
until the next packet 
 
Packet Type  2 1   "U"  Unsequenced Data Packet   
Message  3Variable Alpha-
numeric  
Defined by a higher-level 
protocol   

 
 
 
2.3.3 Client Heartbeat Packets 
 
The client should send a Client Heartbeat Packet anytime more than 1 second passes 
where no data has been sent to the server. The server can then assume that the link 
is lost if it does not receive anything for an extended period of time. 
Client Heartbeat Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value  Notes     
Packet Length 0 2 Integer Number of bytes after this field 
until the next packet  
Packet Type  2 1 "R"  Client Heartbeat Packet   
 
 
 
2.3.4 Logout Request Packet 
 
The client may send a Logout Request Packet to request the connection be 
terminated. Upon receiving a Logout Request Packet, the server will immediately 
terminate the connection and close the associated TCP/IP socket.  
Logout Request Packet  
 Name  Offset Len     Value  Notes     
Packet Length 0 2 Binary Number of bytes after this field 
until the next packet  
Packet Type  2 1 "O"  Logout Request Packet   
 
 
 
3. Support   
Any questions about the SoupBinTCP specification should be emailed to 
devsupport@nasdaqomx.com. 
 
4. Current Restrictions   
None known. 
 
5. Revision History  
 
5.1 Version 1.00 – 9/1/1999 
 
5.1.1 Initial distribution. 
 
5.2 Version 2.00 - 10/29/2001 
 
5.2.1 Added Heart beats in both directions to remove the dependence on TCP/IP 
keep-alive to detect link failures. Server and client are now both guaranteed to send 
something (either data or heartbeat) at least once per second. This way, if you don't 
hear anything from the socket for several seconds, you can assume the socket is 
dead and close it. 
 
5.2.2 Added Debug Messages because they are handy for debugging problems. An 
example is to have a server send a Debug Message upon accepting a connection 
identifying the name of the machine. This way, someone can TELNET into a server 
and immediately verify that they have the right host. 
 
5.2.3 Added "envelopes" around both the outbound Sequenced Messages and the 
inbound Unsequenced Message to differentiate them from the heartbeats. 
 
5.3 Version 3.00 - 10/15/2008 
 
5.3.1 Widened Sequence Number fields on login related packets in order to support 
streams of 1 billion messages or larger. 
 
5.3.2 Added an explicit End of Session Packet so that the SoupBinTCP session layer 
code can more cleanly detect the end of a SoupBinTCP session. 
 
5.3.3 Initial distribution of SoupBinTCP3.0, taken from SoupTCP3.0.  Packets are two 
byte length-prefixed instead of new-line terminated, but otherwise the packet types 
are the same. 
 
5.4 Version 3.00 – 07/20/2009 
 
5.4.1 Removed conflicting sentence from Sequenced data packet description 
 
5.5 Version 4.00 – 07/12/2010 
 
5.5.1 Added unsequenced data packets from the server to the client
 
